this presentation is delivered by the
Stanford center for professional
development
okay so welcome back and um what I want
to do today is talk about um is wrap up
our discussion on factor analysis and in
particular what I want to do is Step
through um parts of the derivation for
em for factor analysis because again
there there there are few steps in the
EM derivation they are particularly
tricky and um that there are specific
mistakes that people often make on
deriving em algs algs like factor
analysis so I want to show you how to do
those steps right so you can apply the
same ideas to other problems as well um
and then in the second half or so of
this lecture I'll talk about principal
component analysis which is um a very
powerful algorithm for um dimensionality
reduction you'll see later what that
means so just a recap um in the previous
lecture I described a few properties of
Gan distributions one was that um if you
have a random variable a random value
Vector X that can be partitioned into
two portions X1 and X2
um and if x is you know Gan with mean mu
and covariant sigma where mu is um
itself a partition
vector and
sigma is
um so of a partition Matrix that can be
written like that so I'm just writing
Sigma in terms of you know the four
subblocks
um then you can look at the distribution
of X and ask what is the marginal
distribution right of say
X1 um
and the answer excuse me we said last
time was that X1 the marginal
distribution of X1 is
Gan with mean mu and covariant sigma 1
one where Sigma 1 one is the upper left
block of that cience Matrix Sigma right
so this this one is no surprise and I
also wrote down the formula for
computing conditional
distributions um such as what is p of
X1 given
X2 and last time I wrote down that you
know the distribution of X1 given X2
would also be
Gan um with
parameters that I wrote as Mu of 1 given
two and sigma of 1 given 2 where um mu
of 1 given 2 is let's see is just this
formula
time okay so with these formulas we'll
be able to look at um a pair of joint
gan random variables X1 and X2 here are
both vectors and compute the marginal
and conditional distributions of the P
of X1 or P of X1 given X to um so when I
come back and derive the Eep actually
well I'll come back and use the marginal
formula in a second and then when I come
back and derive the Eep in the EM Alm
for factor
analysis I'll actually be using these
two formulas again okay um and the again
just to
continue um summarizing what we did last
time we said that you know in factor
analysis
um our
model let's see this is an unsupervised
learning problem and so we're
given an unlabeled training
set right where each
XI is a vector in RN as usual and
um we want to to model the density of X
and um our model for X would be that we
imagine there a latent random variable Z
that's generating well this that's just
zero mean and identity Co
variance and Z will be some low
dimensional thing D and
we
where and uh we imagine the x is
generated as Mu plus Lambda Z Plus
Epsilon where Epsilon is a g random
variable with mean zero and the coari
Matrix
S and so the parameters of this
model are
um mu which is an N dimensional
Vector Lambda which is an N by D
dimensional Vector Matrix and S which is
N
byn and is diagonal
it's a diagonal and it's a diagonal um
uh
Matrix so I guess the cartoon I drew
last time for factor analysis was you
know I said
that maybe that's a typical example of
data point Z if um and in this example I
had D equals 1 uh Nal 2 right so so Z in
this example is onedimensional
equals 1 and so
um you take this data map it to say some
mu plus Lambda Z and that
may give you
some set of points there and lastly this
model was envisioning that you know you
place a little gussan bump around each
of these
say and
Sample let's change short colors
and
uh the X's are then maybe that's that
that that would be a typical sample of
the ex's under this model
okay
um
so
right so how do we fit the parameters of
this
model um
well the joint distribution of um
znx you know is actually
Galan with parameters given by some
Vector I wrote as mux Z and some cience
Matrix
Sigma um and if you write out what those
two things are this Vector mux Z is a
vector of Zer dependent to the vector mu
and the Matrix
Sigma is this partitioned
Matrix okay we also worked this out last
time
um so you can ask what's the
distribution of X under this model and
the answer is well under this model X is
Galan with mean
mu and covariance Lambda Lambda
transvers plus s right so it's just you
know take the second block of the mean
vector and take that
lower um lower right hand corner block
of the cience Matrix and so this is this
is really my formula for computing the
marginal distribution of a gan except
that I'm Computing the marginal
distribution of you know the the the
second half of the vector rather than
the first half right so this is the
marginal distribution of X under my
model
um and so if you want to learn yeah so
the initial distribution you had that's
the uh yeah let's see oh yes you're um
yes so in this Bo I'm writing down the
right this this is really um specifying
the conditional distribution of x given
Z right so um the conditional
distribution of x given
Z this is gussian would mean
um mu plus Lambda
Z and covariant S so this is what that
specifying right um yeah
okay
so
um since this is the marginal
distribution of x given my training set
of M unlabeled examples I can actually
write down the log likelihood of my
training set right so you know the log
likelihood of my training set um
actually let me just write down the
likelihood right so the likelihood of my
excuse me the likelihood of my
parameters given my training set is the
product from IAL 1 to M of P of x i you
know given the
parameters right and
um I can actually write down what that
is because XI is Gan with parameter mu
and variance LDA LDA transpose
Time s so you can just write this down
as you know 1
over 2 pi to the N / 2 the determinant
of right and then
times e to the minus 12 you know X um
right so that's my
formula for the density of a gan that
has mean mu and Co Varian Lambda Lambda
transpose plus I
okay so this is my likelihood of the
parameters given a training set and one
thing you could do is actually take this
likelihood and try to maximize it in
terms of the parameters try to find the
maximum likelihood estim of parameters
um but if you do that you find that if
you try you know take log to get the log
like here take der set D equal to zero
you find that you'll be unable to solve
for the maximum of this um
analytically right and so so if you you
won't be able to solve this maximum
likely estimation problem if you take
the derivative of this respect to the
parameters set the derivators equals to
zero and try to solve for the value of
the parameters Lambda mu and S that
maximizes you so if you won't be able to
do that go and try to
join so what we'll do what what we'll
use instead um to estimate the
parameters in our factor analysis model
will be the EM
Al yeah why is the log
like of X and
not oh right okay so question is why why
why is the likelihood p ofx and not P
ofx given Z or p ofx and Z so the answer
is let's see we're in an um so by
analogy to the mixture of Gan
distributions models um you know we're
given a training set that just
comprises
um an unlabeled training a set of unlb
training
examples but you know for convenience
for whatever reason um
it's easier for me to write down a model
that defines the joint Distribution on P
of X comma Z but um what I would like to
do is really maximize you know as a
function of my parameters I'm using
Theta as a Shand to do all the
parameters of the model I want to
maximize the
probability of the data I actually
observed and this would
be actually Max over Theta
product from I = 1 to M and this is
really integrating out
Z okay so I only ever get to observe x's
and the z's are latent random variables
or hidden random variables and so
um what I like to do is do this
maximization in which I've implicitly
integrated out Z does that make sense
okay
cool um are there other questions about
factor analysis model
so okay
so
um so here's the EM algorithm
um right in the East step we compute the
um you know conditional distribution of
Z given XI and our current setting of
The
parameters and then the M
step um
and in the mend step we perform this
maximization um and if this looks a
little bit different from the previous
versions of em that you've seen the only
difference is that now I'm integrating
over z uh because Z is is now is is now
gy random variable it's now this
continuous value thing so rather than
summing over zi Now integrate over zi um
and if you replace this integr over sum
you give a dzi then this is exactly the
M step you saw when we worked it out for
the mixture of gum small than the other
models so it turns out that
um in order to implement the E step and
the M step there are just two little
things actually there actually three key
things that are different from the
models that you saw previously want to
talk about them um the first one is that
uh the first of the three is maybe the
simplest which is that in the Eep um Z
is now a continuous value random
variable and so um you know to you now
need a way to represent these continuous
value densities probabbly density
functions to represent Qi of z um
[Applause]
so fortunately um in this problem is not
difficult to
do and in
particular right um the conditional
distribution of Z given XI and and our
parameters which I'm going to open it
from this equation
is going to
be um Galan with mean and Co variance
given by you know these two things I
write like
that
where this is going to be equal to the
vector 0o minus
okay and um the way I got this formula
was um if you if you match this to the
formula I had previously for computing
conditional distributions of gaussians
you know this corresponded to the terms
mu1 minus Sigma 1 2 Sigma 22 inverse *
X2 -
mu okay so those are the terms
corresponding to the formula I had
previously for computing the marginal
distributions of a
Galan and
um that is going to be given by you
know that and
again those are the terms corresponding
to the formulas I had for the um uh the
the the very first thing I did the the
the formulas for computing conditional
distributions of gines okay um and so
this is Eep you need to compute the Q
distribution you need to compute excuse
me Qi of Z and to do that what you
actually do is you compute this Vector
mu of zi given XI and sigma of Z given x
i um and together these represent the
mean and Co variance of the distribution
Q where Q is going to be gum so that's
the
Eep um
[Applause]
now here's the M step
then and um just mention the the there
are so of two ways to do to derive M
steps for for for especially Galaxy
models like these
um and here's the key trick I guess
which is that when you compute the mstep
you often need to compute integrals that
look like these
right and then there'll be some function
of Z let me just write z there for
instance right so there are two ways to
compute integrals like these one is if
you write out this is a common made
mistake in in well not mistake common
made un necessary complication I guess
um one way to try to compute this
integral is you can write this out as
integral of a z and well we know what Qi
is Right Qi is a gan so you know 2 pi so
d/
2 um the co Varian of Qi is this Sigma
given x i right which you've computed in
the Eep and then times e to the minus 12
Z minus uh mu of Z given x i you
transpose
Sigma inverse
so that's my Gan density and then
times
Z dzii okay and so writing the zel is
the unnecessarily complicated way to do
it because once you've written out this
integral if you want to you know
actually integrate that's the times
right it's multiplication you want to if
you actually want to evaluate this
integral it just looks horribly
complicated I'm not quite sure how to
evaluate this
um by far the simpler way to evaluate
this
integral is to recognize that this is
just the expectation with respect to Z
drawn from the distribution
Qi of the random variable
Z and once you write it out this way you
notice that well this is just the
expected value of Z under the
distribution
Qi but Qi is a gan distri distribution
you know with mean given by that mu
vector and coari given by that Sigma
vector and so the expected value of Z
under this distribution is just mu of
Z given XI okay does make sense
so by making this observation that this
is just an expected value this is a much
easier way to compute that
integral um
[Applause]
so to on time
um
yeah so we'll apply the same idea to the
m step um so in the M step we want to
maximize this
right there there's also sum over I
there's Al summation over I outside but
this is essentially the term inside the
agmax of the mstep where you know taking
the integral of a z and and just observe
that that's actually that just
corresponds to an
expectation respect to the random
variable Z of the thing
inside um
and so this simplifies to the following
[Applause]
okay
um and it turns out actually all all I
did here was use the fact that you know
P of x given Z * P of Z equals P of X
comma Z right that's just combining this
term and that term gives you the
numerator in the original
um and so it turns out that for factor
analysis um in in in these two terms
this is the only one that depends on the
parameters um the distribution P of Z
has no parameters because Z was just
drawn from a gan with zero mean and
identity Co variance you know Qi of Z is
this fixed Galan it doesn't depend on a
parameters theeta um and so in the mstep
we really just need to maximize this one
term with respect to our parameters um
mu Lambda and S okay
so
um let's
see
yeah there's sort of one more key step I
want to show but to get there I have to
write down sort of an unfortunately
large amount of math but let's let's
let's go and do it
okay so in the M step we want to
maximize um and our our expectations
with with respect to Z drawn from the
distributions Qi and sometimes I'll be
sloppy and just omit this um
okay and now
um this distribution right P of z p of x
i given Z that is a gan density because
um you know x
i given z um this is Gan with mean given
by right mu plus LDA Z
and covariant S and so um in this step
of the derivation I will actually go
ahead and substitute in the formula for
the gum density so I will go ahead and
take this and you know plug into here 1
over 2 pi to the N / 2 um s inverse e to
the dot dot dot okay so we'll go ahead
and plug the Gin density and when you do
that you find that you
get um expectation
oh excuse me right I forgot to say um to
maintain sort of I don't know to to to
not make the derivation too complicated
I'm actually just going to maximize this
with respect to the parameters Lambda
okay so let me just show how to so you
want to maximize this with respect to
Lambda s and mu but just to keep the
amount of math I'm going to do it in
class s I'm just going to show how to
maximize this with respect to the Matrix
Lambda and I'll pretend that s are fixed
okay and so um if you subtitute in the
Galax density you get some expect
expected value of a constant um the
constant may depend on S but not on
Lambda then mine is um this
thing okay um and this quadratic term
essentially came from you know the
exponent in your Gan density when I take
log of
exponent then you end up with this
quadratic
term
um and
then and so if you take the
derivatives of the um expression above
with respect to the Matrix
lomda and you set that to zero right so
um we want to maximize this expression
with respect to the paramet Lambda so
you take the derivative of this with
respect to Lambda oh excuse
me minus
sign in set the derivative of this
expression
um to zero set der is equal to zero to
maximize things right um when you do
that and simplify you end up with the
following
um okay and so that's the um in the M
step this is the value you get this is a
value you should get
um yeah that that should use update your
parameters LDA and again the
expectations um are with respect
to Z drawn from the distributions Qi
right so the very long step of this
derivation is um we need to work
out what these two expect ations are and
so the very first term you know e
transpose I guess is just mu of um
Z given XI transpose because because the
QI distribution is has mean given by
this in
right
um to work out the other term
um let me just remind you I guess that
if
um if you have a random variable
Z this Gan with mean mu and coari sigma
then the cience Matrix Sigma is ezz
transpose
minus EZ EZ
transpose that's you know one of the
definitions of the covariance and so
this implies that ezz transpose
equals Sigma plus
e easy
transfers and so the second term
here um
becomes Sigma Z given
mu
I
plus give x i
[Music]
okay
um and so that's how you compute e of zi
transpose and E of Z zi transpose and
substitute them back into this formula
and you would then have your mstep
update to the parameter Matrix
ler um and the last thing I want to
point out in this derivation is that it
turns out it's probably because of the
name em algorithm expectation
maximization um one common mistake for
the EM algorithm is in the Eep um
someone to take the expectation of the
random variable Z and then in the M step
they just plug in the expected value
everywhere you see it right so in
particular one common mistake in
deriving em for factor analysis is to
look at this and say oh look I see ZZ
trans spells let's just plug in the
expected value under the Q distribution
and so you plug in
that right mu of zi given XI * mu of Z
given XI transpose into that expectation
and this is and this is an incorrect D
and that would be an incorrect
derivation of em and because um it's
missing this other term Sigma of Z given
x i okay so so one common misconception
for em is that in the E step you just
compute the expected value of the Hidden
random variable and the M step you plug
in the expected value and it turns out
in some algorithms that turns out to be
the right thing to do in in the mixture
of gaussians and in the mixture of naive
based models that would actually give me
the right answer but in general the EM
Alm is more complicated than just taking
the expected values of the random
variables and then pretending that you
know they were sort of observe that the
expected values okay so I want to go
through this just to illustrate that
step as
well um and so just to summarize the
three you know the three key things to
keep in that that that came up in this
derivation were one for the Eep we had a
continuous gine random variable and so
to compute the Eep we actually compute
the mean and Co variance of the G of the
distribution Qi um the second thing that
came up was um in the mstep when you see
these integrals uh sometimes if you
expect the interpret that as an
expectation then the rest of the math
becomes much easier and the final thing
was again in the mstep um you know the
EM algorith is derived by a certain
maximum ation problem that we Sol is not
necessarily just plugging the expected
value of Z
everywhere
okay um let's see okay feel like you
just did a ton of math and wrote down
way too many equations um and and and
even doing this that was skipping many
steps so you can go to lecture notes to
see you know the deriv all the steps all
the derivations of the steps I skipped
like how you actually take der with
respect to the Matrix lomer um and how
to compute the updates for the other
parameters as well for Mu for size since
this is only for
Lambda
um and so that's the factor analysis
algorithm
um just I was just wondering uh in the
step in the lower right board well you
said that uh I guess the second term
doesn't have any parameters uh that
we're interested in the first term has
all the parameters so we'll just drop
but uh it seems to me that Qi is uh has
a lot of has a lot of parameters um
let's see right um let's see so question
right so you know doesn't the term Qi
have parameters right so
um so in the EM algorithm um Qi is um
actually sends out in the EM algorithm
sometimes P of z may have parameters but
Qi of zi may never have any parameters
um in in the specific case of factor
analysis P of Z doesn't have parameters
um in in in another example and make
sure gan's model say Z was a multinomial
random variable and so in that example
Pi P of Z had some parameters but it
turns out that Q of zi will never have
any parameters and in
particular you know Qi of zi is going to
be um uh is is this Gan distribution
right is you know is Gan with mean given
by mu of Z given XI and coari you know
Sigma Z given XI
and so
um it's true that mu and sigma made
themselves have depended on the values
of the parameters I had in the previous
iteration of em but um the way I think
about Q is I'm going to take the
parameters from the previous iteration
of the
algorithm and use that to compute what
Qi of Z is and that's that's that's the
Eep and EM
algorithm and then once I computed what
Qi of Z is then this is a fixed
distribution and I'm going to use these
fixed values for mu and sigma and just
keep these two values fixed as I as I
run the M step see so those okay I guess
I was confused because because in the in
the uh the the second board over there's
a lot of it looks like there parameters
but I guess they're old iterations of
the yeah yes yeah yeah you're right yeah
the the the when I wrote down Qi zi that
was a function of so yeah the parameters
from the previous generation and I want
to compute the new setting of
parameters there are there more
questions okay
cool um boy so this is probably the most
math I'll ever do in the lecture in this
entire qu there
so um
let's now talk about a different
algorithm
um actually which board was I
on
um
so okay
so what I want to do now is talk about
an algorithm called principal components
analysis um she soften
abbreviated uh
PCA and
here's the idea um PCA has a very
similar motivation as factor analysis
but it sort of maybe gets to the problem
um you know a little bit more directly
than just factor analysis
um
so question is
given right so still doing unsupervised
learning so given a training set of um M
examples
where each XI um is an N dimensional as
usual what I like to do is reduce
it to a low dimensional data
set where K
is less is um strictly less than n and
often and and quite often it'll be much
much smaller than
n um
so I'm give a couple examples of why we
want to do this um imagine that you're
given a data set that contains
measurements and you know unknown to you
I don't know measure measurements of I
don't know P Pole or something um and
unnown to you whoever collected this
data actually included the height of the
person in centimeters as well as the
height of the person in inches and so
because they're rounding off to the
nearest centimeter or rounding off to
the nearest inch the values won't
exactly match up but you know along two
dimensions of this data anyway
um it'll lie extremely close to the
straight line right but but it won't lie
exactly on a straight line because they
rounding off to the nearest centimet or
inch but L very close the straight line
and so um we have a data set like this
it seems that you know what you really
care about is is that axis right is and
this is s of really this axis is really
the variable of
interest you know that's May the closest
thing you have to the TR height of a
person and um you know this other
axis is just noise okay and so if you
can reduce the dimension of this data
from two-dimensional to onedimensional
um then maybe get rid of some noise in
this data um and quite often you won't
know that this was CM and this was
inches you may have a data set with 100
attributes but you just didn't happen to
notice one was CM one was inches right
um
another Mo and another example that I
sometimes think about is you know some
of you know that my students and I um uh
work with autonomous helicopters a lot
right and so um you imagine that you
take you know surveys of quizzes or
measurements of radio control helicopter
Pilots um maybe one axis you have
measurements
of your um pilot
skill yeah of how skillful your
helicopter pilot is and
um on another axis maybe you measure how
much they actually enjoy flying and
maybe this is really maybe this is
actually roughly onedimensional data and
there's some you know intrinsic variable
of interest which I'll call maybe pilot
aptitude that somehow determines the
skill and how much they enjoy finding
something and so again if you can reduce
this data from two Dimensions to
onedimensional maybe it have a slightly
better measure of you know what I'm
calling Loosely pilot apptitude which
may be what you're really wanting to
capture okay so let's talk with an Al
room to do this and um I should come
back and talk about more applications of
of PCA
later so here's here's the algorithm
um before running PCA is normally you
pre-process the data as follows um I'll
just write this out I guess um
okay so
um
um okay let something I know some of you
writing well okay so this is maybe just
unnecessary amount of writing to say
that you know compute the mean of my
training set and subtract out the means
so now I've zeroed out the mean of my
training set and the other step is um
I'll compute the variance of each of my
features you after zeroing out the mean
and then I'll divide by divide each
feature by the standard deviation so
that each of my features now has equal
variance so these are so standard
pre-processing that will often do for
PCA um I just mentioned that sometimes
um the second step is usually done only
when your different features are on
different scale so if um I don't know if
you're taking measurements of people and
so you know one one one feature may be
their height then another may be their
weight another maybe be the strength
another maybe I don't know how the age
or whatever all of these all of these
quantities on very different scales and
so um you normally normalize the
variance sometimes if all the XIs are
the qu same type of thing um so for
example if um you're taking uh you're
working with images and the x i JS are
the pixels of different you know are on
the same scale because they're all pixel
intensity values ranging from 0 to 255
then you may forget then you may omit
this step
okay um so after
pre-processing let's talk about how we
would find the um main axes along which
the data varies or how we find the
principal axes of variation of the dat
[Music]
um and so to do
that um let me describe let me just go
through one specific example and then
we'll formalize the
algorithm so
okay here's my training set comprising
five examples and you it has roughly
zero
mean and and and the variance on the uh
you know X1 and X2 axis are the same X1
that's X2 axis and so you know the
principal axis the variation of this
data is roughly the the the the positive
45° axis right so what I like to do is
have my algorithm conclude that this
direction that I've drawn with this
Arrow U is is is the best Direction onto
which to project the data so the the
axis by which my data really varies um
so let's think about how we formalize
that right well one thing on look at is
um suppose I take that axis this is
really the axis onto which I want to
project on that I want to capture use to
capture most of the variation of my data
and I take my training set and project
it onto this line
right did not
get you know that set of
points
okay and so you notice that those dots
the projections of my training sets onto
this axis um has very large variance
right in contrast if I were to choose um
a different direction let's say this is
really the orthogonal in the worst
Direction onto which to project my data
if if I project all my data onto this
axis right then I find that the
projections of my data onto the um
purple line onto this other line has
much smaller variance that my points are
clustered together much more tightly
okay so one way to formalize this notion
of finding the the the the um the main
axis of variation of data is I would
like to find a vector U I would like to
find the direction
U so that when I project my data onto
that
direction um the projected points vary
as much as possible so in other words
I'm going to find find a Direction so
that when I project my data onto it you
know the projections are largely widely
spaced out this large variance Okay so
[Applause]
let's
see
um so I want to find the direction U and
um just a
reminder if I have a vector U of Norm
one then the length
of um a vector x
i
projected
well then the vector x i projected onto
U you know has
length um x i transverse U right this is
the to to project a vector on to um to
Project X onto unit Vector the length of
the projection is just X I transpose U
um and so to formalize my PCA problem
I'm going to choose the vector
U to maximize right so I choose use and
this
is subject to the constraint that the
norm of U that the length of U is one um
but I'm going to
maximize let's see sum from I = 1 to
M um the length of the project
projection of the vectors X onto
U okay in particular I want the sum of
square distances of the projections to
be far from the origin I want the
projections of X on U to have large
variant and just to simplify some of the
math later let me put a one over m in
front um and so that quantity on the
right um is equal to 1 / m
c let's see
U transfers XI times x I transfers
U right and so um Can simplify and I get
this is U
transpose
times
you okay
um so want to maximize UT transpose time
some Matrix time U subject to the
constraint that the length of U must be
equ Al to
one um and so some of you recognize that
this means U must be the Principal ARG
Vector of this Matrix in the middle
right so let me just write that down
I'll say a few more words about it so
this implies that U is the principal ion
Vector um of the Matrix and I'll just
call this Matrix Sigma it actually turns
out the co variance Matrix
from r = 1 to
M SP okay um actually let's check how
many of you are how many of you are
familiar with igen vectors wow cool most
of you almost all of you great
um yeah well what about the save PR is
is it's very extremely familiar but this
it's worth it's worth saying anyway um
so
right so if
um uh if you have a matrix a and you
have a vector U and they satisfy Au U
equals Lambda U then this is what it
means for U to be an a vector of the
Matrix a
um and uh the value LDA here is called
an I
value right and so the principal ion
Vector is just the ion Vector that
corresponds to the largest ion value
value um one thing that you may that
some of you may have seen but I'm not
sure that you have I just just want to
relate this to stuff you already know as
well is that um you know optimization
problem is
really maximize U transpose U subject to
the norm of U is equal to one right and
um let me write that constraint as that
U transpose U equals 1 and so con to to
to solve this sort of you know
constraint optimization problem
um you write down the
lren
LDA right where that's the lrange
multiplier right um and so because this
is a constraint optimization right and
so to actually solve this optimization
you take the derivative of L with
respect to U and that gives you um Sigma
U minus Lambda
U you set the derivative equals to zero
and this shows that Sigma U equals
Lambda U and therefore the value of U
that solves this you know constraint
optimization problem that we care about
must be an ARG Vector of Sigma and in
particular it turns out to be the
Principal AR Vector
okay
um
so just to summarize
um what have we done we're shown that
given a training set if you want to find
the principal axis of variation of data
you want to find you know the 1D axis on
which the data really varies the most
what we do is we construct The cience
Matrix Sigma the the the the Matrix
Sigma that I wrote down just now and
then you would find the principal ion
Vector of the Matrix Sigma and um this
gives you the best 1D Subspace onto
which to project the data um
[Applause]
and more
generally
um um more generally you would choose um
um and more generally if you want a k
dimensional Subspace onto which to
project your data you would then choose
U1 for UK to be the top K ion vectors of
Sigma and by top K ion vectors I just
mean the I vectors
corresponding to the K highest igen
values um I guess I showed this only for
you know for the case of a 1D Subspace
but this holds more
generally um and now the ion vectors U1
for UK um represent so give you a new
basis with which to represent your data
okay so yeah is different ax that has to
Beal
uh let's see so by convention in PCA we
will choose the axis yeah right so
um this wor I'm saying so here's here's
just one more example imagine that you
have a thre dimensional data set
um and imagine that your three
dimensional data set it's very hard to
draw in 3D on the board so let me let me
try this um imagine that you know my X1
and X2 axes line the plane of the board
and the X3 axis points directly out the
board right so imagine that you have a
data set where
um most of the data lies on the plane of
the board but there just a little bit of
fuzz so imagine that you know the XV
axis points orthogonally all of the
board and all the data lies roughly in
the plane of the board but there's just
s of like a tiny little bit of fuzz that
so that so that some of the data lies
just a couple of millimeters off the
board right so you run PC on this data
you find that um U1
and U2 will be some pair of bases that
you know essentially lie in the plane of
the board and uh
u3 will be an orthogonal axis that
points roughly out of the plane of the
board
okay so um if I reduce this data to two
dimensions then the bases U1 and U2 Now
give me a new basis with which to
construct my lower dimensional
representation of the
data um just be conf about what that
means um previously we
had
right we have say fairly High
dimensional uh input data x i and RN and
now if I want to represent my data and
this you know new basis given by U1 up
to
UK um
is that um I would take each of my
original training examples x i and I
would now represent it or replace it
with a different Vector which I call Yi
and that will be computed as U1
transpose
x i U2 transpose X
okay and so
um the Yi are going to be K dimensional
where K will be less you know your
choice of K will be less than n so this
represents a lower dimensional
representation of your data and this
represents so an approximate
representation of your original data
where you're using only K numbers to
represent each training example rather
than n numbers
um let's
see yeah okay
yeah have vectors have triv vectors uh
is it possible to have not have igen
vectors have trivial igen
vectors it's only determined by your
data s
is a condition where you
need let's see what do you mean by
trivial argument
factors oh okay yes so I see yeah so see
get this right so there's some there's
some matrices that that that that um I
think degenerate that don't have a full
set of ion vectors um sorry deficient I
think is what it's called is that right
ziko yeah so some matrices are deficient
and actually don't have a full don't
don't don't have a full set of I vectors
so then you like an N byn Matrix that
does not have n distinct vectors but
that turns out not to be possible in
this case because um The ciance Matrix
Sigma is symmetric and symmetric uh
matrices are never deficient so the
Matrix Sigma will always have a full set
of ion vectors um it's possible that you
know if you um uh yeah there's one issue
which is repeated I values so um
uh for example it turns out that um in
this in this example if my covariance
Matrix looks like
this right yeah 0.01 I
guess right it turns out that the
identity of the first two ion vectors is
ambiguous um and by that I mean um you
can choose this to be U1 and this to be
U2 or I can just as well rotate these
ion vectors I can choose that to be U1
and that to be U2 or even you know
choose that to be U1 and choose that to
be U2 and so on and so um when you apply
PCA one thing to just keep in mind is um
sometimes ion vectors can rotate freely
within their subspaces um when you have
repeat ion values or or close to repeat
ion values and so um the way to think
about the vectors use think of as a
bases with which to represent your data
but you know the bases vectors can
sometimes rotate freely and so it's not
always useful to look at the ion vectors
one at a time and say you know this is
my first ion vector and it's capturing
whatever the the the height of the
person a second I Vector it captures the
skill at this t or whatever that's a
very dangerous thing to do when you do
the people when you do PCA um what's
what is Meaningful is the Subspace
spanned by the igen vectors but looking
at the IG vectors one at a time is
sometimes a dangerous thing to do okay
because because it can often rotate
freely or tiny numerical changes can
cause I con vectors to change a lot but
the Subspace Spann by the top k i con
vectors will usually be about the
same um all
right
[Applause]
so um
um actually turns out there are multiple
possible interpretations of PCA um I'll
just give one more without proof which
is that
um you know whatever given a trading set
like this um another view of PCA is and
let me just choose the direction this is
not the principal components right um
and choose some direction and project my
data onto
it this is clearly not the direction PCA
would choose but what you can think of
PC as doing is choose a Subspace onto
which to project your data so as to
minimize the sum of squares uh
differences between the projections and
the original points so in other words um
another way to think of PCA is trying to
minimize the sum of
squares of these of of of these
distances between know the dots the the
the points X and the dots onto which I'm
projecting the data um and it turns out
they're actually they're actually I
don't remember there's like nine or 10
different interpretations of PCA and
this is this is another one there a
bunch of uh ways to derive PCA you you
and you you you get to play with some of
you get to play with PCA ideas more in
the next problem
set
um what I want to do next is um okay
actually what I want to do next is um
talk about a few
applications of
PCA
um
so here are some ways that PCA is used
one is um
visualization right um
very often you have high dimensional
data sets someone gives you like a 50
dimensional data set and it's very hard
to for you to look at the data set
that's 50 dimensional and understand
what's going on because you can't plot
something in 50 Dimensions um so common
practice if you want to visualize a very
high dimensional data set is to take
your data and project it into say a 2d
plot or project into a 3D plot so you
can you render like a 3D display on your
computer um so you can better visualize
the data and look for structure um one
particular cool example that that I
learned about of doing this recently was
in Krishna shano's lab here in Stanford
uh in which he um he had readings from
50 different parts of a monkey brain I
actually don't was the number of 50 but
of tens of Parts different parts of
monkey Reign and so you know youd have
this 50-dimensional readings of 5050
dimensional vectors correspond to
different amounts of electrical
activities in different parts of the
monkey brain there's actually 50 neurons
but you tens of neurons um but it was
tens of neurons in the monkey brain and
so you have a 50-dimensional Time series
um and very hard to visualize this very
high dimensional data but what he and
the students did was use PCA to project
this 50-dimensional data down to free
dimensions and then you can visualize
this data in three dimensions of just
using a 3D plot and so you could you so
of visualize what the monkey is thinking
over time so that was
cool um another common application of
PCA is uh
compression right so if you have high
dimensional data and you want to store
it with few real numbers clearly PC is a
great way to do this um it turns out
also that um sometimes in machine
learning sometimes you just given
extremely high-dimensional input data
and for computational reasons you don't
want to deal with such high dimensional
computation data such hyperdimensional
data right and so
um fairly one one common use of PCA is
takeing very high dimensional data and
represent it you with a low dimensional
Subspace is at Yi is the representation
I wrote down just now so that you can
work with much lower dimensional data
and um it turns out to be just seems to
like a fact of life that when you're
given extremely high dimensional data um
almost all the time just in practice of
all the high very high dimensional DSS
I've ever seen you know High very high
dimensional DSS often have all their
points lying on much lower dimensional
subspaces so very often you can
dramatically reduce the dimension of
your data and really not and and really
not be throwing too much uh too much of
the information away um
so um let's see right so if you're
learning algorithm it takes a long time
to run on on on very high dimensional
data you can often use PCA to compress
the data to lower Dimension so that your
learning A runs much faster and you can
often do this with your sacrificing
almost no performance in your learning
algorithm um there's one other use of
PCA for learning uh which is um you
remember when we talked about learning
theory we said that the more features
you have the more complex your
hypothesis class if say you're doing
linear classification right if you have
more features you have lots of features
then you may be more prone to
overfitting so one other thing you could
do with PCA is just use that to reduce
the dimension of your data so that you
know you have few feat and you're maybe
slightly less prone to overfitting um
this particular application of PCA to
learning I should say you know it
sometimes works it often works I I'll
actually later show a couple of examples
where you sort of do this and it works
um but this particular application of
PCA I find when looking in Industry it
also seems to be a little bit overused
um and and in particular actually let me
say more about that
later um I'll come back to that later um
there one more one couple of other
applications I talk one is um outli
detection or anomaly
detection right and so um the idea is um
suppose they give you a data set you may
then run PCA to find you know roughly
the Subspace on which your data lies and
then um if you want to find anomalies in
in future examples you then just look at
your future examples and see if they lie
very far from your Subspace so this
isn't a fantastic anomaly detection
ALG it's not a it's not a very good an
right so the idea is if I give you a
data set you may find a low dimensional
Subspace on which it lies and then if
you ever find a point that's far from
your Subspace you can flat that as
anomaly so this is not this isn't this
really isn't the best anom detection Al
room but but sometimes this is done um
and the last application that I'm going
to talk spin spin of go into a little
bit more in detail is um
um is U matching or to find better
distance
calculations so and let me say what what
I mean by this now go into much more
detail on this last
one so
so here's the idea
um let's say you want to do face
recognition see I need to use my laptop
later just make
sure just W this up for okay so let's
say once you do face recognition and you
have um 100 by 100
images right so um you know picture of a
face is like whatever right some array
of pixels and the pixels have different
grayscale values and depending on you
know the different gray scale values you
get different people's of different
pictures of people's faces right and so
so just make sure my laptops
awake okay um so you have 100 by 100 uh
pixel images and think of each face
as a 10,000 dimensional Vector um which
is very high
dimensional and
um these two Contin to keep in mind and
think of you know here's so so here's a
here's my plot of my 100 dimensional
space right and if you look at a lot of
different pictures of
faces you know each face will be along
will will be some point in this 100,000
dimension
space and
um in this cartoon I want to think of it
as maybe most of this data lies on a
relatively low dimensional Subspace
because um in this 100,000 in this
10,000 dimensional space really not all
points correspond to valid images of
faces right the vast majority of values
the vast majority of 10,000 dimensional
images just correspond to random noise
light looking things and don't
correspond to a valid image of a face
but inste um the space of possible face
images probably spans a much lower
dimensional Subspace okay shoot laptop's
not waking up for some reason let me
see
sorry okay let's see if this
works okay um and so what we'll do is
we'll use PCA to find the low dimension
Subspace on which the data lies and in
practice um a PCA dimension of 50 would
be fairly
typical and um right so think of you
know there's some axes that really
measure the shape or the appearance of a
face and there are some other
axes that we're not interested in that
are maybe just you know random
noise so what we'll do is um
for face recognition I might give you a
picture of a face and ask you what face
looks the most similar to this I going
give you a picture of someone and ask
you can you find other pictures of the
same
person um and so you know the key step
to do that right is to look at two faces
and to compare how similar these two
faces are
so just okay and so here's how we use
PCA um given
a phas
there and a different phas there the way
I measure the distance between these two
faces is I won't just measure the ukian
distance similarity instead I'll take
this face and project it onto my 50
dimensional Subspace and take this
project to my 50 dimensional Subspace
and measure the similarity between those
two points in the Subspace okay and so
when I do that I end up with you know a
face here and a face here that look very
far upon the original space but when I
project them onto the Subspace they may
end up looking much more
similar so what I want to show you in a
second on the laptop is um let's
see you know given each of these
training examples
right um as a 10,000 dimensional Vector
I can plot that as a grayscale image and
I get like a per like picture of some
person's
face what I'll also show you on the
laptop will be plot of my I vectors and
so the IG vectors also live in the
10,000 dimensional Subspace and I plot
that you get you know some image
that's um and these images are called
ion
faces and what PCA is doing is
essentially using linear combinations of
these ion phase images to approximate
these XI and there's this ion faces that
span the of these bases U1 you two and
so on to span hopefully the Subspace
along which um my faces live okay so
bring down the laptop display
piece
boy sorry about running a bit late I'm
not sure what my laptop's doing
geez still seems to be slowly you
H okay nearly
there for
yeah no idea why it's taking so long to
start it right now
but
there all right yeah now ta Paul spent a
lot of time in the middle of the last
night last night preparing some of these
images so got sh them okay cool so
here's a train set comprising you know
aligned images like these um LGE much
larger set than than than the shown here
and so when you run PCA
um these are um some of the plots that
the UI so remember I said plot the IG
vectors UI um in the same way there
plotting the training examples and so
you end up with the I vectors being sort
of grayscale images like these and will
approximate images of faces with linear
combinations of these so I said it's
dangerous look at individual ion vectors
but um and and you really shouldn't do
that but let me just do that a little
bit anyway so if you look at the first
icon Vector this corresponds roughly to
whether the face is illuminated from the
left or the right right so depending on
how heavy the weight is on this image
that roughly captures variation and
illumination um second image just hard
to tell it seems to be capturing
variation and overall brightness of the
face um the third ion Vector capturing
roughly you know how much of a shadow or
maybe a beard or something the person
has and so on it's dangerous to look at
individual I vectors but sort of just
slightly inform of look at it um here's
an example of a specific um application
of igon faces so this is um from Sandy
pendland Alex penland's lab in MIT um in
this display this upper leftmost image
is the input to the igen phases
algorithm and um the algorithm is then
also go for datab pH and find the most
similar faces and so you know this
second image here is what it thinks is
the most similar face of the input um
the next one over is the second most
similar the next one over is the third
most similar and so on and so using ion
faces and using by measuring distances
between faces in that low dimensional
Subspace is able to do you know reasonal
job identifying pictures of the same
person even so with the with with faces
the person removed oh and the next row
shows the next most similar phase and so
on so this just
um uh this one is the is the fourth most
similar phase and so on this one more
different okay so the use application of
ion faces um the last thing I want to
say is just um when people talk tell me
about machine learning problems I do
often recommend they try PCA for
different things so PCA is a useful
thing to to to know to use for
compression visualization so on um but
in Industry I just tend to see sometimes
PCA used slightly more often than there
there also sometimes where you see
people using PCA when they're really
shouldn't so just one final piece of
advice for use of PCA is um before you
use it also think about whether you
could just do it with the original
training data XI without compressing it
since I've also definitely seen people
compress the data when they really did
need to um but but but having said that
I also often advise people to use PCA
for various problems it also works um
okay sorry about running late let's wrap
up for today
then for